---
layout: post
title:  "42 University"
tags: coding bootcamp 42 SV gamification
---
## Introduction
In 2018, five days after I graduated high school I flew to Silicon Valley with my friend and spent the next 30 days going to [42 University](https://42.fr/en/homepage/) to take the [Piscine](https://42.fr/en/admissions/42-piscine/). I'm writing this four years after my visit to relive my memories there. If you just want to read about how the system works you can skip this section.

### What Is 42 University
42 is a peer-to-peer campus that aims at teaching students how to code. There are no teachers, there are only daily tasks and weekend/group projects. The rest is up to the students to teach each other and to learn by themselves. It is a big campus filled with iMacs that focuses on students helping each other to learn.

### Getting An Invite
Everything started with my friend finding a website about a "university" in Silicon Valley that offered a one-month coding bootcamp to get into the university. They offered free housing during these 30 days in San Fransisco. Immediately we read all the information we could find about the university online and even watched a few videos on youtube. To get a spot to go to the university you had to pass a logic puzzle. I remember going home and doing the logic puzzle and thinking about the genius idea of having such a fun but simple game as a test. Anyone could do it regardless of programming skill.

Afterward, we both got emails that we would be able to come to the university, so we managed to convince our parents to let us go. 

### The First Day
I had visited New York and Florida three years before I visited Silicon Valley but the energy and the people in Silicon Valley are quite different from the people in New York. But this time I was there with just one friend and got to experience what it was like to live in America for 30 days. It started with us not finding the address to the student housing and we didn't want to turn on our GPS because of the worry of the pricy roaming fees we would have to pay. Eventually, we made found it and were given a room to set up our bunk beds, we probably shared about 16 square meters between four guys. I got to room with my Swedish friend that I traveled there with, an Armenian that lived in LA (the self-proclaimed natural-born genius) and a Puerto Rican teacher. The bathroom was simple and since the housing had been DeVry (I think) universities dorms it wasn't of the best of qualities. I'd recommend flip-flops in the shower, although I didn't have any.

### The People 
When we started at 42 everyone came from different places in the world, with different experiences and very different skill sets. One of my good friends there was a locksmith that wanted to become a coder, some were CS students that wanted to get some coding experience and perhaps a way to find a job. Everyone was nice and growing up in Sweden I would say that Swedes are quite introverted, we rarely talk to strangers and at 42 it was essential to talk to strangers. It was part of if not the most important lesson at 42, that with just a few friends and the web the information you can learn is unbounded.

The entire culture and the system are designed to make new friends, everyone I met was very open and happy to help one another whether it was 10 am or 3 am didn't matter. Since I traveled from Sweden and didn't even have a driver's license there were lots of different people that drove me around to restaurants, the golden gate bridge and other places all of which became great friends of mine. Most of them I still talk to today and have met up with after 42. 

<!-- I can't and won't talk about all the brilliant people I met there but let's just say that everyone was really friendly and open to helping anyone. -->

## The System
For students to be productive at 42 a system is in place that makes sure that students are motivated and know what to do next. It is quite difficult to pass all of the activities and instead, the main focus at 42 is for a student to improve and learn. This is a description how of the system works in the Piscine I know it works differently if you begin to study there but I have only taken the Piscine so I will speak from that experience. Studying at 42 includes internships and choosing what fields you'd like to study.

### Daily Tasks
Every weekday at 8:42 am the set of new daily tasks is released they are due the next day at 11:42 pm. At the beginning of the Piscine, the tasks were aimed at getting students used to terminals and code editors, then the tasks were aimed at teaching low-level C code where you were not allowed any imports you had to write your own standard library and functions such as `strcmp`, `strcpy`, `malloc`. Daily tasks also taught you fundamental C tools such as header files, and Makefiles.

<!-- After submitting the daily tasks they were run through a compiler and linter and if it passed those they ran the code through a couple of test cases. If you passed more than 25% of the daily work you were able to pass that day, yet you could only pass a day if you got it corrected by two different peers, you also had to grade two other peers to make sure that you were helping others. The daily tasks often had easier tasks in the beginning and then proceeded to the harder tasks, the correction system also ran through task by task and if you failed one it did not correct the others. Therefore it was essential to make sure that you passed the easier tasks. -->

After submitting the daily task you have to get graded by two different peers and they give you a percentage based on how many different tasks you've passed. Then you are graded by a system (Moulinette) that compiles your code and runs it through a couple of tests and then the system grades you. If the person that graded you were within 20% of the Moulinette grade the peer grade can raise your daily grade because perhaps you were able to explain your solution but made some simple mistake and therefore you are given some leniency.

You need to pass 25% of the daily tasks to pass that day otherwise, no points are awarded for that day. The tasks are also tested in order which means if you fail the first task no other tasks will be graded and you fail the entire day. That's only to make sure that you know the basics well before going on to the later tasks.

### Group Projects
Every weekend you were assigned a group and a task. These tasks were quite a lot bigger and harder than the daily tasks but they were quite fun. Like creating a Sodoku solver that was able to verify if a Sodoku was valid (if there are two different solutions to a Soduku it's not valid). These projects were not graded by peers but instead graded by cadets (students studying there) and they were quite stringent to make sure that every group member understood every part of the solution. 

### Weekend Projects
Other than the group project you get a weekend project. These are harder than daily tasks but might not require a ton of code. The weekend projects require that you get graded by three peers since these projects are quite valuable based on the tiers I will explain later.

### Exams
You take four exams while you're at 42 and the last one is the most important. Yet they do like to see improvement while you're there so every exam is important. Exams are on Fridays and Exam00-02 are 4 hours long from 6 pm to 10 pm although you're allowed to leave at any point, the final exam is similar but 8 hours.

The exams are taken on an offline computer and you only have access to a terminal with a text editor installed. You start at level 0 and then you are given quite a simple task and once you have solved the task in a `.c` file you write `grademe` in the terminal and then your code is tested. There is a test database for every level so different students might not get the same tasks for every level. You have to get 25/100 points to pass the exam and every time you fail a task the next task on that level will give you half the points. On the final exam level 0 gives 8 points and every level gets progressively more difficult. 

### Tiers
Everything at 42 is based on what level you are, the higher the level the better. To level up, you need to pass any of the tasks that are available yet everything is weighted through tiers. This means that if you're only there to get as high level as possible you should focus less on the group project and more on your weekend project. These are the tiers:

- T0: Group project
- T1: Daily Tasks, Exam00, Exam01, Exam02
- T2: Weekend Project, Final Exam
- T3: BSQ (A project you work on with a friend for a week)

### Correction Points
Correction points are the system that 42 uses to make sure that everyone is contributing to the system. You're given one correction point per person that you grade and a grading session should last for about 30 minutes which means you usually spend 1-2 hours a day grading other people. You are not able to get graded by anyone if you don't have correction points, hence everyone has to contribute to the grading system otherwise you're not able to pass your tasks. You're able to grade anyone on a given day even if you've not passed that day or that task, this means that even though you might not have a full understanding of a certain task you can grade someone on it. This might sound weird in theory but in practice, this works perfectly fine since that just means that the student that has done the task needs to give a more detailed explanation to the grader.

### The Norm
42 uses a linter that they've designed to make sure that new coders write code using a certain standard. This includes not having lines longer than 80 characters and making sure that functions aren't too long and that each file isn't too many lines. In the beginning, this is quite annoying and I found their 8-tab length to be quite ugly (even though Linux uses it) but after a while, you get used to it and it's nice that everyone's code is written in the same standard, it makes for easier grading.
